Specify the upload and verify phases of the PA protocol (#43)
abetterinternet/prio-documents: draft-pda-core.md

# PA protocols {#pa}

This section specifies a framework for generic PA protocols. Concrete
PA protocols are described in {{prio}} and {{hits}}.

[TODO: Say that protocol messages are carried by HTTP requests and responses.]

[TODO: Decide how to authenticate the leader in leader-to-helper connections.
One option is to use client certificates for TLS; another is to have the leader
sign its messages directly, as in Prio v2.]

[TODO: Decide the "content type" for HTTP requests.]

[TODO: chris-wood suggested we specify APIs for producing and consuming each of
the messages in the protocol. Specific PA protocols would implement this API.]

**Error handling.**
In this section, we will use the verbs "abort" and "alert with `[some error
message]`" to describe how protocol participants react to various error
conditions. The behavior is specified in {{pa-error}}. For common errors, we may

> elide the verbs altogether and refer to to {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

Reviewer: This seems out of place -- was it supposed to be move to some later point in the document?

Author: No, it was meant to go here.

Reviewer: Hmm, okay. It just feels out of place. We can always move later.

## Configuration {#pa-config}

**Tasks.**
Each PA protocol is associated with a *PA task* that specifies the measurements
that are to be collected and the protocol that will be used to collect them:

~~~
struct {
  uint16 version;

>   uint16 id;

Reviewer: This probably needs to be larger, say, `uint8 id[32]`?

with it.]

The first field, `version` specifies the version of this document. The second
field, `id` is an opaque value used by the clients, aggregators, and collector
to uniquely identify the PA task at hand. We call it the *task id*. The last
field, `proto`, identifies the concrete PA protocol.

[TODO: Decide who assigns `PATask.id`. It'll probably be the collector.]

[OPEN ISSUE: @acmiyaguchi suggested using a UUID instead of 16-bit integer for
the id. Does this make sense for our application?]

**Parameters.**
A PA task may have protocol-specific parameters associated to it. These are
encoded by the `PAParam` structure, which also includes the task:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  select (PAClientParam.task.proto) {
    case prio: PrioParam; // Defined in Section 3
    case hits: HitsParam; // Defined in Section 4
  }
} PAParam;
~~~

[TODO: Add batch parameters, including min/max batch size, batch time window,
etc.]

### Helper key configuration

Each helper specifies the
[HPKE](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-irtf-cfrg-hpke/) public key the
client will use to encrypt the helper's share of the report. The public key and

> associated parameters are structured as follows:

Author: The delta would be adding support for multiple HPKE ciphersuites. Although I see the value of aligning the structures across specs, I'd also like to push back on adding agility for now. I've added a TODO for resolving this later.

~~~
struct {
  uint8 id;
  HpkeKemId kem_id;
  HpkeKdfId kdf_id;
  HpkeAeadKdfId aead_id;
  HpkePublicKey public_key;
} HPKEKeyConfig;

opaque HpkePublicKey<0..2^16-1>;
uint16 HpkeAeadId; // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
uint16 HpkeKemId;  // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
uint16 HpkeKdfId;  // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
~~~

We call this the helper's *key configation*. The key configuration is used to
set up a base-mode HPKE context to use to derive symmetric keys for protecting
the shares sent to the helper. The *config id*, `HPKEKeyConfig.id`, is forwarded
by the client to the helper, who uses this value to decide if it knows how to
decrypt a share it receives.

**Pre-conditions.**

> We assume the following conditions hold before the protocol begins:

Reviewer: 👍

1. The client, aggregators, and collector are configured with a specific PA task.
1. The client knows the URL of the leader endpoint, e.g., `example.com/metrics`.
   We write this URL as `[leader]` below. (We write `[helper]` for a helper's
   URL.)
1. The client and leader can establish a leader-authenticated TLS channel.
1. The leader and each helper can establish a leader-authenticated TLS channel.
1. Each helper has chosen an HPKE key pair.
1. The aggregators agree on a set of PA tasks, as well as the PA protocol and
   parameters used for each task.

## Upload {#pa-upload}

[TODO: Add an illustration of this sub-protocol.]

> Uploading a report involves two requests to the leader. In the  *upload start

Reviewer: 👍

request*, the client discovers the protocol-specific parameters and the endpoint
URL of each helper. In the *upload finish request* uploads its report to the
leader.

[OPEN ISSUE: @acmiyaguchi pointed out that the use of an anonymizing proxy for
uploading shares might be easier to implement if the "upload" phase involved a

> single HTTP request. Is this true? Does OHTTP

Reviewer: 👍 agree with this, though it seems deployment specific? I might include this as an option for some deployments, maybe in an appendix.

(https//www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-thomson-http-oblivious-01.html) allow
clients to make multiple requests without too much fuss?]

### Upload Start

**Request.**
Let `[leader]` denote the URL of the leader's report ingestion endpoint. The
client sends a POST request to `[leader]/upload_start` with the following
message:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  opaque id[16];
} PAUploadStartReq;
~~~

The first field, `task` corresponds to the PA task for which a report will be

> generated. The second, `id` is a random, 16-byte string generated by the

Reviewer: The `id` seems to tie the upload start and finish together. A couple questions:
1. Can we drop it if we turn this into a single HTTP request?
2. if we keep both requests, why do they need to be tied together?

Author: >  The id seems to tie the upload start and finish together. A couple questions:
>
>     1. Can we drop it if we turn this into a single HTTP request?

For some Prio proof systems, it's useful for the leader to send the client a "challenge" that it'll use to generate the proof. One way to use the id is as a way of generating the challenge in a way that's unique for each upload.

>     2. if we keep both requests, why do they need to be tied together?

Retransmitting the id allows the two HTTP requests to be handled without carrying state between them.

Reviewer: I don't see why that's valuable or desired, since it just pushes state onto the server. (Left a separate comment for that, so will resolve this.)

client.

[OPEN ISSUE: Maybe use a UUID for `PAUploadSTartReq.id`, as well as for
`PATask.id`?]

**Response.**
The leader responds to well-formed requests to `[leader]/upload_start` with
status 200 and the following message:

~~~
struct {

>   Url helper_urls<0..2^16-1>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Url helper_urls<1..2^16-1>;
```

Also, has `Url` been defined yet?

Author: It hasn't! Added a definition.

I'm not taking the suggestion because I don't want to get nit-picky about size ranges yet. This is something that's likely to change a lot.

Reviewer: Well, can the helper_urls be empty? If not, then we should take the suggestion.

Author: Well, a Url is itself a u16-prefixed string, so I guess the minimum is actually 2. Again, I don't think it's worth being picky about this right now.

Reviewer: It's not really being picky. It's just saying that the URLs must be non-empty.

  PAProto proto;
  select (PAUploadStartResp.proto) {
    case prio: PrioClientParam; // Section 3
    case hits: HitsClientParam; // Section 4
  }
} PAUploadStartResp;
~~~

The message includes the URL of each helper and any protocol specific parameters
the client needs to generate its report. The leader's response to malformed
requests is specified in {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

### Upload Finish

For each URL `[helper]` in `PAUploadStartResp.helper_urls`, the client sends a
GET request to `[helper]/key_config`. The helper responds with status 200 and an
`HPKEKeyConfig` message. Next, the client collects the set of helpers it will
upload shares to. It ignores a helper if:
* the client and helper failed to establish a secure, helper-authenticated
  channel;
* the GET request to the helper URL failed or didn't return a valid key config;
  or
* the key config specifies a KEM, KDF, or AEAD algorithm the client doesn't
  recognize.

If the set of supported helpers is empty, then the client aborts and alerts the

> leader with "no supported helpers". Otherwise, for each supported helper the

Reviewer: Why is this alert important? What is the leader to do with this information?

Reviewer: Can't the leader determine if helpers are "online"? This seems to reveal information that's specific to clients. Imagine, for example, that clients are prohibited from talking to helpers but not the leader. Is it OK that leaders learn that about a client? I'm not sure, so I'd be inclined to remove this unless we have a concrete use case.

~~~
helper_enc, context = SetupBaseS(pk, PAClientParam.task)
~~~

where `pk` is the KEM public key corresponding to `HPKEKeyConfig.public_key`.
The outputs are the encapsulated context `helper_enc` and the context `context`.

Next, the client encodes its measurements as an input for the PA protocol. It
then generates a validity proof for its input and uses `context` to split the
input and proof into a leader share and a helper share, where the latter is
encrypted by the HPKE context. Note that the details of each of these processing
steps --- encode, prove, split, and encrypt --- are specific to the PA protocol.

[OPEN QUESTION: Is it safe to generate the proof once, then secret-share between
each (leader, helper) pair? Probably not in general, but maybe for Prio?]

The payload of the POST request is structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  opaque id[16];              // Equal to PAUploadStartReq.id
  uint8 helper_key_config_id; // Euqal to HPKEKeyConfig.id
  Url helper_url;             // URL of helper endpoint
  PAHelperShare helper_share; // The helper's encrypted share
  PALeaderShare leader_share; // The leader's share
} PAUploadFinishReq;

struct {

>   opaque enc<0..2^16-1>;     // Encapsulated HPKE context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  opaque enc<1..2^16-1>;     // Encapsulated HPKE context
```

>   opaque payload<0..2^16-1>; // The encrypted share (may be empty)

Reviewer: Why is this allowed to be empty?

} PAHelperShare;

opaque PALeaderShare<0..2^16-1>;
~~~

This message is called a *report*.

**Response.**
The leader responds to well-formed requests to `[leader]/upload_finish` with
status 200 and an empty payload. Malformed requests are handled as described in

> {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

Reviewer: What does the client do if one helper returns a 200 and another returns an error?

Reviewer: The protocol (as specified here) allows n>1 helpers to be used, right? (We may just only ever use one in practice.) I'm asking what we do if there are n>1 helpers and they all don't return 200. Does that clarify?

## Verify {#pa-verify}

[TODO: Add an illustration of this sub-protocol.]

After the client uploads a report to the leader, the leader and helper verify
the validity proof as specified by the PA protocol. This phase involves two
requests sent from by the leader to the helper: the *verify start request*, and

> the *verify finish request*. The contents of each request depend largely on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the *verify finish request*. The contents of each request depend on the
```

specific PA protocol. However, both requests contain the helper's share of the

> report, allowing the helper to run the verification protocol statelessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
report submitted during the upload protocol, allowing the helper to run the verification protocol statelessly.
```

Another important feature of the verification protocol is that the leader may
"batch" multiple runs of the protocol into the same message flow. This allows
the leader to throttle the load on the helper endpoint.

At the end of this phase, the leader and helper will have decided whether a set

> of client inputs are valid. For each valid input, they proceed as described in

Reviewer: Is the set here the batch in total, or the set of individual reports?

{{pa-collect}}.

### Verify Start

The leader begins the protocol by collecting a sequence of helper shares that
all correspond to the same helper endpoint URL, key configuration, and PA task.
For each share, it generates the first protocol messages as specified by the PA
protocol, then proceeds as follows.

**Request.**
Let `[helper]` denote the helper URL. The leader sends a POST request to
`[helper]/verify_start` with the following payload:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  uint8 key_config_id;
  PAHelperShare shares<0..2^24-1>;       // Any number of helper shares
  select (PAVerifyStartReq.task.proto) { // Payload for each helper share
    case prio: PrioVerifyStartReq payloads<0..2^24-1>;
    case hits: HitsVerifyStartReq payloads<0..2^24-1>;
  }
} PAVerifyStartReq;
~~~

Each helper share has a corresponding message payload contained in
`PAVerifyStartReq.payloads`. This includes any protocol-specific information the
helper needs for the first step of input validation, e.g., the joint randomness

> used by the leader and helper for the protocol run. Note that a well-formed

Reviewer: We've not defined joint randomness, so I might drop this example text entirely. The preceding text seems clear enough as-is.

message contains as many payloads as shares, i.e., the sequence
`PAVerifyStartReq.payloads` has the same number of elements as
`PAVerifyStartReq.shares`. Moreover, the `i`-th payload should correspond to the
`i`-th share for each `0 < i <= L`, where `L` is the length of
`PAVerifyStartReq.payloads`.

[TODO: Instead of a sequence of shares and a sequence of payloads,
`PAVerifyStartReq` should have a sequence of (share, payload) pairs. (Here and
below.) This is difficult to express in TLS syntax because we have to select on
the protocol type.]

**Response.**
The helper handles well-formed requests as follows. (As usual, malformed
requests are handled as described in {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.) It first looks
for the PA parameters `PAParam` for which `PAVerifyStartReq.task.id ==
PAParam.task.id`. Next, it looks up the HPKE config and corresponding secret key
associated with `PAVerifyStartReq.key_config_id`. If not found, then it aborts

> and alerts the leader with "unrecognized key config".

Reviewer: What does the leader do for a batch in this situation?

Author: Ah, good point. This might happen, say, if the helper advertises the wrong key config during the upload phase. The shares are useless if the helper can't decrypt them, so I don't think the leader has a choice other than to abort. This falls into the bucket of situations that re-running the protocol with multiple helpers is meant to address.

Reviewer: Yeah, we might want to note this (or flag a TODO to spell it out later).

according to the PA protocol and sends a request to the helper, constructed as
follows.

**Request.**
The leader sends a POST request to `[helper]/verify_finish` with the following
message:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;                     // Equal to PAVerifyStartReq.task
  uint8 key_config_id;             // Equal to PAVerifyStartReq.key_config_id
  PAHelperShare shares<0..2^24-1>; // Equal to PAVerifyStartReq.shares
  select (PAVerifyFinishReq.task.proto) {
    case prio: PrioVerifyFinishReq payloads<0..2^24-1>;
    case hits: HitsVerifyFinishReq payloads<0..2^24-1>;
  }
} PAVerifyFinishReq;
~~~

As usual, the `i`-th payload corresponds to the `i`-th payload of the
`PAVerifyStartResp` sent by the helper in response to the previous request.

**Response.**
The helper handles POST requests to `[helper]/verify_finish` as follows. It
begins just as before by looking up the PA parameters `PAParam` for which
`PAVerifyStartReq.task.id == PAParam.task.id`. Next, it looks up the HPKE config
and corresponding secret key associated with `PAVerifyStartReq.key_config_id`.
If not found, then it aborts and alerts the leader with "unrecognized key

> config".

Reviewer: Is there missing text here? What does the helper actually do with the FinishReq message?

Finally, the helper responds to the POST request with status 200 and the
following message body:

~~~
struct {
  PAProto proto;
  select (PAVerifyFinishResp.proto) {
    case prio: PrioVerifyFinishResp payloads<0..2^16-1>;
    case hits: HitsVerifyFinishResp payloads<0..2^16-1>;
  }
} PAVerifyFinishResp;
~~~

As usual, the `i`-th payload corresponds to the `i`-th payload of the
`PAVerifyFinishReq`.

### Decision

The helper decides whether each of its input shares is valid after it responds

> to the leader's verify finish request. Likewise, the leader decides whether each

Reviewer: To clarify, this means the helper knows the valid bit after sending `PAVerifyFinishResp`, right?

of its shares is valid after processing the helper's response to its verify
finish request.

For each valid input, each aggregator derives its input share and stores it for
use in [the "Collect" phase](pa-collect.md) of the PA protocol.

# Collect {#pa-collect}

[TODO]

# Error handling {#pa-error}

A protocol participant *aborts* the protocol by tearing down the TLS connection

> with each of its peers.

Reviewer: Is this what we want to do if the helper fails to process one share of a batch?

Reviewer: Sorry, I was zeroing in on the "tear down the HTTPS connection" piece. I don't think that's really required. All that seems required is for the protocol (be it upload, verify, etc) to be aborted, which might manifest in tearing down HTTPS, or it might not. For upload, aborting is likely akin to tearing down the connection, but it might not be. (Clients could, e.g., keep open persistent connections to the leader if they're uploading many things.)

Author: Good point! "Aborting" just means forgetting any state associated with the protocol ... it needn't result in dropping the HTTPS state altogether.

I guess we don't need to be explicit about what "abort" means right now. I just deleted this paragraph.

An *alert* is a message sent either in an HTTP request or response that signals
to the receiver that the peer has aborted the protocol. The payload is

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  opaque payload<0..255>;
} PAAlert;
~~~

where `task` is the associated PA task (this value is always known) and
`payload` is the message. When sent by an aggregator in response to an HTTP

> request, the response status is [TODO]. When sent in a request to an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
request, the response status is 400. When sent in a request to an
```

Uploading a report involves two requests to the leader. In the  *upload start
request*, the client discovers the protocol-specific parameters it needs to
generate the report, as well as the endpoint URL of each helper. In the *upload
finish request*, it uploads its report to the leader.

[NOTE: @acmiyaguchi pointed out that the use of an anonymizing proxy for
uploading shares might be easier to implement if the "upload" phase involved a
single HTTP request. However, OHTTP
(https//www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-thomson-http-oblivious-01.html) allows
clients to make multiple requests through a proxy, so these kinds of use cases
should work.]

[NOTE: @cjpatton: Breaking the upload phase into two requests is useful for
supporting Prio-like proof systems in which the leader sends the client a
"challenge" it uses to generate the proof. (See the SIMD construction of
{{BBCp19}}, Section 5.2. Here, the "challenge" is a randomly generated field
element.) Because the client/leader are using TLS, another way to implement this
would be to export a secret from the key schedule.]

### Upload Start

The client sends a POST request to `[leader]/upload_start` with the following

> message:

Reviewer 2: The client obviously has to perform the `upload_finish` part of the protocol each time they want to submit a report, but it doesn't make sense to require them to run `upload_start` each time they submit metrics. We should specify client caching behavior for helper URL lists obtained from leaders and key configs obtained from helpers (see also my comment just below about using `HTTP GET` for cacheable, idempotent requests).

   parameters used for each task.

[TODO: It would be clearer to include a "pre-conditions" section prior to each
"phase" of the protocol.]

## Upload {#pa-upload}

[TODO: Add an illustration of this sub-protocol.]

Uploading a report involves two requests to the leader. In the  *upload start
request*, the client discovers the protocol-specific parameters it needs to
generate the report, as well as the endpoint URL of each helper. In the *upload
finish request*, it uploads its report to the leader.

[NOTE: @acmiyaguchi pointed out that the use of an anonymizing proxy for
uploading shares might be easier to implement if the "upload" phase involved a
single HTTP request. However, OHTTP
(https//www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-thomson-http-oblivious-01.html) allows
clients to make multiple requests through a proxy, so these kinds of use cases
should work.]

[NOTE: @cjpatton: Breaking the upload phase into two requests is useful for
supporting Prio-like proof systems in which the leader sends the client a
"challenge" it uses to generate the proof. (See the SIMD construction of
{{BBCp19}}, Section 5.2. Here, the "challenge" is a randomly generated field

> element.) Because the client/leader are using TLS, another way to implement this
> would be to export a secret from the key schedule.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
element.)]
```

of parties and that the server is always authenticated.

[TODO: Decide how to authenticate the leader in leader-to-helper and
aggregator-to-collector connections. One option is to use client certificates
for TLS; another is to have the leader sign its messages directly, as in Prio
v2.]

[TODO: @chris-wood suggested we specify APIs for producing and consuming each of
the messages in the protocol. Specific PA protocols would implement this API.]

[OPEN ISSUE: This needs to be reworked in order to account for protocols, like
Hits, that involve multiple rounds of verify/collect. See issue #44.]

**Error handling.**
In this section, we will use the verbs "abort" and "alert with `[some error
message]`" to describe how protocol participants react to various error
conditions. The behavior is specified in {{pa-error}}. For common errors, we may
elide the verbs altogether and refer to {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

## Configuration {#pa-config}

### Tasks
Each PA protocol is associated with a *PA task* that specifies the measurements
that are to be collected and the protocol that will be used to collect them:

~~~
struct {
  uint16 version;
  opaque id[16];
} PATask;

~~~

> [TODO: Decide how to serialize protocol messages. We're using TLS syntax for
> now, but there's no reason to stick with it other than most folks are familiar
> with it.]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

A reasonable point, but we are accumulating a lot of TODOs.

> The first field, `version` specifies the version of this document. The second

Reviewer 3: Do you mean like draft-blah-blah-01?

Reviewer: Yeah, I assume so, similar to what we did for ECH.

field, `id` is an opaque identifier used by the clients, aggregators, and
collector to uniquely identify the PA task at hand. We will call it the *task
id* in the remainder.

[TODO: Decide how the `PATask` is configured. Eventually this will be
distributed, in an authenticated manner, from the collector the other parties.

> For now, we just assume this value is negotiated out-of-band.]

Reviewer 3: I'm not quite following what's going on here. Why not just give each task version its own UID? Or alternatively have version somewhere else.

Reviewer: Versioning the ID of a task seems fine, though not much different from each task ID being generated randomly. We can address this in a followup change. I'll clarify in the TODO.

Reviewer: The version here is "version of the protocol." But maybe I'm misunderstanding you?

"phase" of the protocol.]

## Upload {#pa-upload}

[TODO: Add an illustration of this sub-protocol.]

Uploading a report involves two requests to the leader. In the  *upload start
request*, the client discovers the protocol-specific parameters it needs to
generate the report, as well as the endpoint URL of each helper. In the *upload
finish request*, it uploads its report to the leader.

[NOTE: @acmiyaguchi pointed out that the use of an anonymizing proxy for
uploading shares might be easier to implement if the "upload" phase involved a
single HTTP request. However, OHTTP
(https//www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-thomson-http-oblivious-01.html) allows
clients to make multiple requests through a proxy, so these kinds of use cases
should work.]

[NOTE: @cjpatton: Breaking the upload phase into two requests is useful for
supporting Prio-like proof systems in which the leader sends the client a
"challenge" it uses to generate the proof. (See the SIMD construction of
{{BBCp19}}, Section 5.2. Here, the "challenge" is a randomly generated field
element.) Because the client/leader are using TLS, another way to implement this

> would be to export a secret from the key schedule.]

Reviewer: Yeah, we're unlikely to make this change, so we can probably just delete the note.

### Upload Start

The client sends a POST request to `[leader]/upload_start` with the following
message:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
} PAUploadStartReq;

> ~~~

Reviewer: > IIUC the leader doesn't actually do anything in response to the upload_start request except serve up some static configuration parameters.

In some cases, the server may supply per-upload data to be used in the finish message, so I think we ought to keep this to accommodate those protocols.

> ~~~

Reviewer 2: I suspect we can make this a GET without precluding those protocols, but we can pursue that question after merging this change: #48

The `task` field corresponds to the PA task for which a report will be
generated.

The leader responds to well-formed requests to `[leader]/upload_start` with
status 200 and the following message:

~~~
struct {
  PAParam param;
  Url helper_urls<1..2^16-1>;
  select (PAUploadStartResp.param.proto) {
    case prio: PrioUploadStartResp;
    case hits: HitsUploadStartResp;
  }

> } PAUploadStartResp;

Reviewer 3: I don't quite understand the underlying assumptions here. If the client wants to upload some data, it's not going to be confused about whether the task involves heavy hitters or prio. What happens if it thinks it's doing prio and the leader responds with heavy hitterS?

Reviewer: This is to accommodate different parameters for the actual upload that are protocol specific. For example, if Hits or some future protocol requires per-upload data, that'd be in the HitsUploadStartResp.

Reviewer 3: Sure, but why is PAParam here? Almost nothing there can change.

Reviewer: I guess it depends on how things are configured? The assumption now is that clients start with a Task and then learn the Params for that task during Upload, but if we assume that Params are also distributed out-of-band, then we can drop it here.

opaque Url<1..2^16-1>;
~~~

The message includes the URL of each helper and any protocol-specific parameters
the client needs to generate its report. The leader's response to malformed
requests is specified in {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

### Upload Finish

> For each URL `[helper]` in `PAUploadStartResp.helper_urls`, the client sends a

Reviewer 3: This seems like it has some obvious security problems. What stops the leader from just telling the client it runs all the helpers?

Reviewer: Presumably clients will just check against their set of helpers or some local policy?

Reviewer 3: But then why do I need the server to tell me.

I think there's a philosophical issue here: We should avoid having the leader tell the client anything that could be inconsistent with things it already needs to know. If we are trying to detect mismatch, we should instead have a config structure where the server sends the hash (or it's included in an AAD or something). That way we detect mismatch but don't rely on the client checking each parameter. Otherwise, we get into situations where the client might inappropriately trust the leader.

Reviewer: That's a good point -- if the baseline assumption is that the leader is not trusted to not collude, and clients can't reasonably check for this, then this needs to change. (Let's do that in the next PR.)

> GET request to `[helper]/key_config`. The helper responds with status 200 and an

Reviewer: @ekr pointed out that client's should probably dictate the helpers (on behalf of the data collector), so this is likely to change.

> `HpkeConfig` message. Next, the client collects the set of helpers it will

Reviewer: I think a Cache-Control header seems appropriate, but that does seem like an implementation detail. If the key has expired then the client's share will fail to be aggregated. (Though we would need to make sure this happens during Verify.)

> `HpkeConfig` message. Next, the client collects the set of helpers it will

Reviewer 2: Filed #49 to consider key rotation and how it fits into the protocol.

upload shares to. It ignores a helper if:
* the client and helper failed to establish a secure, helper-authenticated
  channel;
* the GET request to the helper URL failed or didn't return a valid key config;
  or
* the key config specifies a KEM, KDF, or AEAD algorithm the client doesn't
  recognize.

If the set of supported helpers is empty, then the client aborts and alerts the
leader with "no supported helpers". Otherwise, for each supported helper the

> client issues a POST request to `[leader]/upload_finish` with a payload

Reviewer: > Does this mean we only support 2-way secret sharing? I think that's OK, but we should make that constraint of the system more obvious.

Indeed -- this is limited to the two-server case. 

> Since all the reports are going to the same leader server, could they be combined into a single message, and hence a single request with a single state to be managed by the client and leader?

I don't see why not, though this seems like an optimization more than a functional change. 

> Is the client expected to secret share the input differently for each PAUploadFinishReq it constructs? If not, then PAUploadFinishReq.leader_share will be identical in each message, and since the leader share will be much larger than the helper share (at least in Prio where the helper's share is a PRNG seed), we should work out a way to absolve the client (which might be on an expensive and slow cellular network) of having to upload the leader share k times. 

Yes, I think that's expected. (That is, I assume the proof is fresh for each upload.)

> client issues a POST request to `[leader]/upload_finish` with a payload

Reviewer 2: I think this is fine, so long as each of the `k` protocol runs the client initiates for a given report are totally independent from one another.

constructed as described below.

[OPEN ISSUE: @chris-wood: Can't the leader determine if helpers are "online"?
This seems to reveal information that's specific to clients. Imagine, for
example, that clients are prohibited from talking to helpers but not the leader.
Is it OK that leaders learn that about a client? I'm not sure, so I'd be
inclined to remove this unless we have a concrete use case.]

The client begins by setting up an HPKE {{!I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke}} context for
the helper by running

~~~
enc, context = SetupBaseS(pk, [TODO])
~~~

where `pk` is the KEM public key encoded by `HpkeConfig.public_key`. The outputs
are the helper's encapsulated context `enc` and the context `context`.

[TODO: Decide what the info string should be. At a minimum it should include

> `PAParam` so that the PA parameters are implicitly authenticated by the helper.

Reviewer: Yeah, though we might want to fold in the entire PATask here anyway.

when it decapsulates `enc`. We might consider using the hash of the transcript
between the client and leader so far, i.e., `PAUploadStartReq`, ...,
`PAUploadStartResp`, as this would be the most conservative thing. We just need
to ensure that the helper can reproduce this transcript. This should be possible
given the information it has.]

Next, the client encodes its measurements as an input for the PA protocol. It
then generates a validity proof for its input and uses `context` to split the
input and proof into a *leader share* and a *helper share*, where the latter is

> protected by the HPKE context. Note that the details of each of these processing

Reviewer: That's right. Are you looking for a specific text change?

> then generates a validity proof for its input and uses `context` to split the
> input and proof into a *leader share* and a *helper share*, where the latter is
> protected by the HPKE context. Note that the details of each of these processing

Reviewer 2: How about:
```suggestion
then generates a validity proof for its input, splits the input and proof into
a *leader share* and a *helper share*, using `context` to protect the latter.
Note that the details of each of these processing steps --- encode, prove,
split, and encrypt --- are specific to the PA protocol.
```

steps --- encode, prove, split, and encrypt --- are specific to the PA protocol.

[OPEN ISSUE: Is it safe to generate the proof once, then secret-share between
each (leader, helper) pair? Probably not in general, but maybe for Prio?]

[OPEN ISSUE: allow server to send joint randomness in UploadStartResp, and then
enforce uniqueness via double-spend state or something else]

The payload of the POST request to `[leader]/upload_finish` is structured as
follows:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;                 // Equal to PAUploadStartReq.task
  uint8 helper_hpke_config_id; // Equal to HpkeConfig.id
  Url helper_url;
  PAHelperShare helper_share;
  PALeaderShare leader_share;

> } PAUploadFinishReq;

Reviewer 3: Why are we replicating the leader_share for each helper?

Reviewer: There's only one helper here, so no duplication.

Reviewer 3: "Otherwise, for each supported helper the client issues a POST request to `[leader]/upload_finish` with a payload
constructed as described below.

Reviewer: Oh I see. Will flag as an open issue.

# PA protocols {#pa}

This section specifies a protocol for executing generic PA tasks. Concrete
PA protocols are described in {{prio}} and {{hits}}.

Each round of the protocol corresponds to an HTTP request and response. We
assume that some transport layer security protocol (e.g., TLS or QUIC) is used
between each pair of parties and that the server is always authenticated.

[TODO: Decide how to authenticate the leader in leader-to-helper and
aggregator-to-collector connections. One option is to use client certificates
for TLS; another is to have the leader sign its messages directly, as in Prio
v2.]

> [TODO: Decide the "content type" for HTTP requests.]

Reviewer: Let's use ["application/octet-stream"](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types/Common_types).

Author: Done.

[OPEN ISSUE: This needs to be reworked in order to account for protocols, like
Hits, that involve multiple rounds of verify/collect. See issue #44.]

**Error handling.**
In this section, we will use the verbs "abort" and "alert with `[some error
message]`" to describe how protocol participants react to various error
conditions. The behavior is specified in {{pa-error}}. For common errors, we may
elide the verbs altogether and refer to {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

## Configuration {#pa-config}

**Tasks.**
Each PA protocol is associated with a *PA task* that specifies the measurements
that are to be collected and the protocol that will be used to collect them:

~~~
struct {
  uint16 version;
  opaque id[16];
} PATask;

~~~
[TODO: Decide how to serialize protocol messages. We're using TLS syntax for
now, but there's no reason to stick with it other than most folks are familiar
with it.]

The first field, `version` specifies the version of this document. The second
field, `id` is an opaque identifier used by the clients, aggregators, and
collector to uniquely identify the PA task at hand. We will call it the *task
id* in the remainder.

> [TODO: Decide how the `PATask` is negotiated. Eventually this will be

Author: s/negotiated/configured

contains any protocol-specific parameters that are required.

### Helper key configuration

Our protocol uses HPKE for public-key encryption {{!I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke}}.  Each
helper specifies the HPKE public key that clients use to encrypt the helper's
share. The public key and associated parameters are structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
  uint8 id;
  HpkeKemId kem_id;
  HpkeKdfId kdf_id;
  HpkeAeadKdfId aead_id;
  HpkePublicKey public_key;
} HpkeConfig;

opaque HpkePublicKey<1..2^16-1>;
uint16 HpkeAeadId; // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
uint16 HpkeKemId;  // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
uint16 HpkeKdfId;  // Defined in I-D.irtf-cfrg-hpke
~~~
[TODO: Decide whether to re-use the config from OHTTP/ECH. This would add
support for multiple cipher suites.]

We call this the helper's *key configation*. The key configuration is used to
set up a base-mode HPKE context to use to derive symmetric keys for protecting
the shares sent to the helper. The *config id*, `HpkeConfig.id`, is forwarded
by the client to the helper, who uses this value to decide if it knows how to
decrypt a share it receives.

## Pre-conditions

> We assume the following conditions hold before the protocol begins:

Author: That's right. Added.

1. The client, aggregators, and collector are configured with a specific PA task.
1. The client knows the URL of the leader endpoint, e.g., `example.com/metrics`.
   We write this URL as `[leader]` below. (We write `[helper]` for a helper's
   URL.)
1. The client and leader can establish a leader-authenticated secure channel.
1. The leader and each helper can establish a leader-authenticated secure
   channel.
1. Each helper has chosen an HPKE key pair.
1. The aggregators agree on a set of PA tasks, as well as the PA protocol and
   parameters used for each task.

> [TODO: It would be clearer to include a "pre-conditions" section prior to each

Author: Let's do so, but in a follow-up PR.

request*, the client discovers the protocol-specific parameters it needs to
generate the report, as well as the endpoint URL of each helper. In the *upload
finish request*, it uploads its report to the leader.

[NOTE: @acmiyaguchi pointed out that the use of an anonymizing proxy for
uploading shares might be easier to implement if the "upload" phase involved a
single HTTP request. However, OHTTP
(https//www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-thomson-http-oblivious-01.html) allows
clients to make multiple requests through a proxy, so these kinds of use cases
should work.]

[NOTE: @cjpatton: Breaking the upload phase into two requests is useful for
supporting Prio-like proof systems in which the leader sends the client a
"challenge" it uses to generate the proof. (See the SIMD construction of
{{BBCp19}}, Section 5.2. Here, the "challenge" is a randomly generated field
element.) Because the client/leader are using TLS, another way to implement this
would be to export a secret from the key schedule.]

### Upload Start

**Request.**
The client sends a POST request to `[leader]/upload_start` with the following
message:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;

>   opaque id[16];

Author: (Getting rid of upload id, as it's motivation is tied to a particular instantiation of Prio.)

} PAUploadStartReq;
~~~

The first field, `task` corresponds to the PA task for which a report will be
generated. The second, `id` is the client's *upload id*, which it chooses at
random.

> 

Author: I'm fine with saying whatever here. (I don't actually think we need language about this yet.) I'll take the suggestion and we can overwrite it later if we choose.

  PALeaderShare leader_share;
} PAUploadFinishReq;
~~~

We sometimes refer to this message as the *report*. The message contains the
`task` and `id` fields of the previous request. In addition, it includes the
helper's HPKE config id, endpoint URL, and the helper and leader shares.
The helper share has the following structure:

~~~
struct {
  opaque enc<1..2^16-1>; // Equal to helper_enc
  PAProto proto;
  select (PAHelperShare.proto) {
    case prio: PrioHelperShare;
    case hits: HitsHelperShare;
  }
} PAHelperShare;
~~~

Field `enc` encodes the helper's encapsulated HPKE context. The remainder of the
structure contains the share itself, the structure of which is specific to the
PA protocol. The structure of the leader share is similarly protocol specific:

~~~
struct {
  PAProto proto;
  select (PALeaderShare.proto) {
    case prio: PrioLeaderShare;
    case hits: HitsLeaderShare;
  };
} PALeaderShare;
~~~

Note that the leader share is sent not encrypted.

**Response.**
The leader responds to well-formed requests to `[leader]/upload_finish` with
status 200 and an empty payload. Malformed requests are handled as described in
{{pa-error-common-aborts}}.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[OPEN ISSUE: consider client->leader upload replays, and what leaders should do to mitigate against them. Prohibit early data? Strike register? Something else?]]
```

## Verify {#pa-verify}

[TODO: Add an illustration of this sub-protocol.]

After the client uploads a report to the leader, the leader and helper verify in
zero knowledge that the proof is well-formed. The exact procedure for doing so
is protocol specific, but all protocols have the same basic structure. In
particular, the protocol is comprised of a sequence of HTTPS requests from the
leader to the helper. At the end of this phase, the leader and helper will have
decided whether a set of client inputs are valid. For each valid input, they
proceed as described in {{pa-collect}}.

**Request.**

> The leader begins by collecting a sequence of reports that are all associated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leader begins with a sequence of reports that are all associated
```

Slightly reworded so as to not require servers to do some sort of batching if they don't have any reports to batch.

with the same PA task, helper URL, and helper HPKE config id. Let `[helper]`
denote the the URL. The leader sends a POST request to `[helper]/verify` with
the following message:

~~~
struct {
  PATask task;
  uint8 hpke_config_id;
  PAVerifyReq seq<1..2^24-1>;
} PAVerifyReqSeq;
~~~

The structure contains the PA task, the HPKE config id, and a sequence of
*sub-requests*, each corresponding to a unique client report. Sub-requests are
structured as follows:

~~~
struct {
  opaque upload_id[16];

>   opaque enc<0..2^16-1>;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  opaque enc<1..2^16-1>;
```

structure is dedicated to the protocol-specific helper share and request
parameters used for the current round.

**Response.**
The helper handles well-formed requests as follows. (As usual, malformed
requests are handled as described in {{pa-error-common-aborts}}.) It first looks
for the PA parameters `PAParam` for which `PAVerifyReq.task.id ==
PAParam.task.id`. Next, it looks up the HPKE config and corresponding secret key
associated with `PAVerifyReq.key_config_id`. If not found, then it aborts and
alerts the leader with "unrecognized key config". [NOTE: In this situation, the
leader has no choice but to abort. This falls into the class of error scenarios
that are addressable by running with multiple helpers.]

The resposne is structured as a sequence of *sub-responses*, where the i-th
sub-response corresponds to the sub-request for each i. As for sub-requests, the
structure of each sub-response is specific to the PA protocol:

~~~
struct {
   PAVerifyResp seq<1..2^24-1>;
} PAVerifyRespSeq;

struct {
  PAProto;
  select (PAVerifyResp.proto) {
    case prio: PrioVerifyResp;
    case hits: HitsVerifyResp;
  }
} PAVerifyReq;
~~~

> Fopr each sub-request `PAVerifyReq`, the helper computes the corresponding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each sub-request `PAVerifyReq`, the helper computes the corresponding
```
